SPECX Notes

The good news (for those for whom that sort of news is good) is that, thanks
largely to the efforts of Horst Meyerdierks at The University of Edinburgh, and
following an intensive burst of work over Christmas on my part, SPECX should
shortly be available on Starlink UNIX platforms. Large parts of the port are
complete but it is not quite clear when there will be enough of a system to be
worth releasing it to starlink. At the date of writing (4th January) neither
GSD nor FITS i/o has been implemented, so there is still no way to import data
other than by direct conversion of VAX files in SPECX internal format. Horst
has written a standard SPECX command to do this - for the present anyway it
produces .SDF files, which use Starlink NDF and HDS libraries. Remo Tilanus has
been working on a GSD reader, and converting the FITS stuff should not be too
difficult (although tape i/o will probably not be supported under UNIX), so
with any luck it will not be too difficult to finish off V6.4. 

Unfortunately a number of the nicest features of the VAX version - such as ^C
handling and proper support for dual-screen alpha graphics terminals - are
unlikely to be available in the first UNIX version (6.4), and users may notice
some "debug" type statements which are unfortunately necessary to circumvent
bugs in the f77 compiler, but for most purposes SPECX V6.4 should satisfy
the need. With any luck it will be released to Starlink during February,
and if not, then soon after. Whether the documentation will be
available by then is another matter. 

Horst is aware of the need to be able to export SPECX to non-Starlink
sites without them needing to take on the whole of the Starlink environment,
and I am assured that this will be possible. However in the first instance
it is probable that UNIX software will be available only through ROE, or
later through the Starlink Librarian --- in any case, probably
not from me directly.

Meanwhile, for those who do have access to a VAX still, and while
you are at the telescope, the improvements in V6.3 should make life
easier. In fact the release of this version has been prompted mainly
by the successful commissioning of the DAS, which in turn has required
major changes in the internals of SPECX to accomodate extra header
information required to define the frequency scales accurately.
Several new commands have been added for dealing with DAS data, while
others have been modified slightly.

Most importantly, the SPECX internal datafile and map format has changed.
As always, SPECX 6.3 is able to read any existing files and maps you may have,
but it is no longer able to write to them. Map files (with the .MAP 
extension) are converted to V3 the first time they are opened by the
new program --- if you intend also to use earlier versions of SPECX then
make a copy of the map before you use V6.3 for the first time. This is
not true of ordinary datafiles; you just can't write spectra to them 
any more, but it is a simple matter to open a new file and then copy the
spectra across one by one or in a DO loop.

The reason these file formats have had to change is to accomodate the
LO and IF frequencies in the header, along with the velocity of the
source in various frames. These were not previously available in the
GSD file, but were derived within SPECX from the specified source-frame
centre frequency of each sub-band. This is not however a natural way to
do things, and proved prone to error with increasingly complex data
such as those produced by the DAS. Hence the change. Since things *were*
changing I have taken the opportunity to tidy up some other relics of
bygone computer systems --- RA and DEC are now stored internally as R*8
degrees, and the map offsets are stored as reals. This has meant
changes to some of the macros supplied with SPECX, and if you use these
variables in your own macros then you will need to modify them
accordingly.

1.  New and modified commands:

CLIP-SPECTRUM       --- Sets all values in a spectrum outside of the specified
                        range to a specified value.
CONCATENATE-SPECTRA --- Combines all sub-bands of the spectra in X & Y stack
                        positions into a new spectrum (the individual subbands
                        are retained).
WRITE               --- A version of PRINT modified to write into an SCL
                        character variable which can then be used in response
                        to a request of character input (a filename say)
READ-FITS-SPECTRUM  --- Reads a SPECX or CLASS FITS spectrum from a disk-FITS
                        file into the X stack position.
OPEN-FITS-FILE      --- Replaces OPEN-FITS-OUTPUT-FILE, and has new questions.
CLOSE-FITS-FILE     --- Replaces CLOSE-FITS-OUTPUT-FILE
SET-PLOT-SCALE      --- Now lets you specify auto-scaling for the X and Y
                        plot axes separately.
SET-MAP-PARAMETERS  --- Now lets you specify that the map axes are to be
                        scaled in sexagesimal form - i.e., RA and Dec in HMS.
SHOW-VARIABLES      --- Accepts VMS-type wildcards, so that, for example, the
                        command ">> show-var f*" will return all SCL variables
                        that begin with the letter f.
PLOT-LINE-PARAMETERS--- As well as the existing set of parameters (Tmax, Vmax,
                        Integrated intensity and Delta(v)), now also offers you
                        the 1st and 2nd moments of the line profile. The 1st
                        moment is the Centroid; the 2nd moment approximates the
                        line width for lines of good Signal/Noise ratio.


2.  Bad channel/Magic value handling

Bad-channel handling has been available for some time in the various
mapping functions, although it tends to go unseen (except when you
forget to do an INTERPOLATE for sparsely sampled data). A version of
this has now been introduced for single-spectrum data. Channels in
spectra set to this value are not displayed on plots, or used in
computing quantities such as maximum intensity or line width. Channels
which end up being unspecified, as the result of a SHIFT operation say,
are now set to the bad channel value, rather than zero as before. Bad
channels can be interpolated over with smoothing commands such as HANN,
SMOOTH, CONVOLVE, BIN etc.

You can determine the current setting of the bad channel value by doing:
          >> print badpix_value
and if you don't like it, you can change it by doing:
          >> badpix_value = -100
for example. The one place where bad channels in spectra are not handled
well is in spectra in a map cube  --- fewest problems will result if you
smooth over such bad channels before ADDing to the map, or choose a value
of badpix_value close to zero (I tend to use 1.e-5 by default). Although
we did have some teething problems with this feature, it seems to be working
pretty well now --- It is particularly useful for dealing with DAS data, where
the end channels of each subband tend to be set to 10**4 or some such similar
value, and totally destroy the auto-scaling of plots.

Note that if you change the value of badpix_value as shown above, then 
previously "hidden" channels in your data will now be displayed, and/or
used in reduction operations.


3.  Map display

A few mostly cosmetic changes have been introduced here. Displays involving
greyscales will mostly now have a scale-bar displayed wherever there seems
to be most room. This is not foolproof however, and for some unfortunately
sized maps the scale-bar may vanish off the edge of the plot area -- just
do SET-MAP-SIZE if this is the case. Note that the scale bar will *not*
appear in the case of PLOT-LINE-PARAMETERS when more than one map is made ---
the various maps in this case have different scales, and it did not seem
sensible to try to generate scale-bars for each independent panel.

Also, you can now display RA and Dec coordinates (only) in all forms of
map display (GRID, CHANNEL-MAP, GREY, CONTOUR and PLOT-LINE-PAR) in 
standard sexagesimal notation. That is, absolute positions are displayed,
in HMS and DMS respectively. You can however still display things in the
old way if you want -- the map centre RA and DEC are now indicated in the
axis labels. Use SET-MAP-PARAMETERS to change the default axis scaling.


4.  FITS i/o

There have been ongoing problems with exchanging single spectra in FITS
format between SPECX and CLASS. We (Remo Tilanus and I) believe that
this has now been cured, following minor changes to both programs (with
the cooperation of the CLASS authors at IRAM). Certainly SPECX now
seems to produce valid CLASS spectra. I have also resurrected John
Richer's FITS reader, and with a great deal of hacking turned it into a
standard command that reads disk-FITS spectra (SIMPLE=.TRUE. only) into
the X position of the stack. This command is READ-FITS-SPECTRUM   ---
open the FITS file with OPEN-FITS-FILE and close it afterwards with
CLOSE-FITS-FILE as before (note that the names of these commands have
been changed from OPEN-FITS-OUTPUT-FILE and CLOSE-FITS-OUTPUT-FILE
respectively).

FITS maps are more of a problem. Claire Chandler has recently modified 
WRITE-FITS-MAP to make it compatible with AIPS (it always used to be, so
I assume that AIPS has changed too...), but this is probably *not* compatible
with CLASS. We may eventually need separate commands to write FITS maps
for different targets.


5.  Frequency and Velocity scaling of Plots

It is now possible to produce plots which have the image sideband 
frequency along the top axis. To get this, all you have to do is to
choose the absolute frequency options in SET-X-SCALE. Note however 
that it is unlikely to be correct unless the display frame is the one
in which the source is at rest. Since you *may* have observed with
(say) the LSR velocity not equal to that of the source itself, I can't
protect you from this. But in most cases it will be sufficient to do
     >> SET-VELOCITY-FRAME yes lsr radio vlsr
That is, choose a velocity reference frame which is defined as having
velocity offset with respect to the standard of rest the same as that
of the source itself (modify as appropriate for heliocentric,
geocentric or telluric frames, and for different velocities or velocity
definitions).

HOWEVER... You must realize that most plotting packages, PGPLOT
amongst them, accept REAL*4 numbers only. So if you display things in
absolute frequency, it is not possible to get velocities accurate to
better than a couple of MHz in three hundred odd GHz, no matter how
accurately they are calculated internally in SPECX. For more accurate
displays, choose a convenient reference frequency in the absolute
frequency option in SET-X. For  example, if you have a set of lines 
in the range 338 -- 339 GHz, then choose a reference frequency of
338 GHz, and remember to add this back on to any frequency you determine
with FIT-GAUSSIAN, or using the cursor.

My thanks to Remo Tilanus in particular for his help,
provision of DAS data, and rapid turn around of queries while we
were solving the problems associated with the DAS. My apologies to
anyone who may have been inconvenienced by problems in the Beta-test
version --- I hope you appreciate that it was the only way to make
DAS data available at all.

Rachael Padman
04-Jan-1994

