1) "As appears to be unknown to the author, the essentials of the FellWalker
algorithm are identical to those of the watershed transform,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Watershed_(image_processing), which is used
in various fields. In astronomy, it has been used in large-scale
structure quite widely, both on regular and irregular meshes, for example
in void (http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007MNRAS.380..551P ;
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2008MNRAS.386.2101N) and dark-matter-halo
(http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998ApJ...498..137E;
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005MNRAS.356.1222N) identification. For a
similar algorithm based on "persistence" and Morse theory, which has
connections to the watershed transform, see
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011MNRAS.414..350S. A review-like
discussion can be found in
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014arXiv1406.6111W.

Some discussion of this context should be included, and it should be
noted if there are any important differences between FellWalker and a
watershed algorithm that I have missed. It should be noted in the
abstract that FellWalker is essentially a watershed algorithm, if only
for it to reach a wider audience of those interested in watershed
methods."

- Thanks for pointing this out. I have labelled FellWalker as a watershed
algorithm in the abstract and have added a paragraph to the introduction
expanding upon this.



2) "While it is fairly clear that FellWalker represents an improvement over
CLUMPFIND in several ways, it is not entirely clear from the discussion
whether or not there are other algorithms used in clump finding that also
give improvements. Some discussion of other clump finders should be
given."

- I have included a paragraph in the introduction that mentions some
other popular approaches to clump-finding, but since the purpose of the
paper is to document the FellWalker algorithm and to compare it with
Clumpfind I have not expanded too much on this. Other methods such as
GaussClumps, dendrograms, getsources, etc, all take very different
approaches to FellWalker/CLUMPFIND. They are probably to be preferred in
some cases, but that depends on the science being done. My paper focuses
on cases where simple image segmentation is what is required.




3) "Sec. 2.2: One method that watershed implementations use to prune
noise is to use a _ratio_ between a peak and a saddle, e.g. in
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005MNRAS.356.1222N. Does the author
suspect that that (or a difference, etc. in pixel values) would work as
well as the "MinDip" criterion, or is MinDip especially suited to the
type of data being analyzed?"

- The MinDip criterion does in fact do this. It merges clumps if the
difference between the peak and the neighbouring saddle is below the
supplied MinDip value.




4) "Figs. 5 and 6 seem to differ by only a couple of pixels, to me. It
would make sense to somehow indicate any pixels that have changed. Also,
since the change is so subtle, why not eliminate the "cellular automaton"
step, for simplicity? Perhaps there are more pathological cases than that
shown in Fig. 5 that it improves?

- Yes that is the case. The artificial data I use is very smooth and so
does not benefit much from cleaning, compared to real data. The join
between the two clumps is largely unaffected by the cleaning, but the
outer boundaries of the two clumps show the effects more clearly. I've
changed the wording of the captions to point this out.



5) "Please define "total data sum." This is simply the sum of the pixel
values within the structure, correct?

- That's right. I've added words to make this clearer.


6) "In Sect. 2.5, a sentence or two describing the STC-S shape parameter
(and an expansion of the initialism) should be present.

- I've added a brief description of STC-S.



7) "In the test case of Gaussian mixtures (Figs. 7, 8), the obvious
method to compare FellWalker to is a Gaussian mixture model. I am not
asking for this to be implemented and tested, but I suggest the author
speculate on the advantages and disadvantages of FellWalker compared to
that. One obvious benefit of FellWalker is that it assumes no fixed
shape, although a particular algorithm may perform better for Gaussian
mixtures."

- I have added a footnote to this effect.



8) "Although in Sect. 3.1, the text says that all the Gaussian sources
have equal amplitude, that does not appear to be so, by eye. Is that
because of an improbable number of overlaps, does my eye deceive me, or
is the text wrong? Fig. 11, on the other hand, does seem to have a set of
equal, superimposed Gaussians."

- Yes, the clumps shown in Figs 7 and 8 do not all have the same peak
value, but this is not the data that is used for the later tests. It is
simply intended as a visual illustration of how clumpfind fragments
clumps. The data used for the later tests is described in section 3.1,
but is not shown visually in any of the figures. I've added a footnote to
emphasis this.



9) "I find the "gain" quantity, the thing used for quantitative
comparison in Figs. 9, 10, to be a bit confusing, and should be explained
further. Why is it called "gain"? This is the total "data sum" in all
clumps? It may be more useful to look at the "data sum" spectrum, i.e.
the PDF of "data sum" over clumps, but that would be more difficult to
view as a function of MaxJump."

- Part of the reason for choosing the "gain" as a measure of performance was
that it is easily visualised. I have re-worded section 3.3 in order,
hopefully, to make its meaning clearer.



